title: Electric Ultralights
date: Friday, November 12, 2021
publish: yes
<!-- Post Markdown begins here -->
Electric Ultralights
======================================================================

Electric aircraft are recently on everyone's mind, it seems, but the
most reasonable are the most skeptical.  They bring up [a lot of
excellent
points](https://www.planeandpilotmag.com/news/pilot-talk/2021/10/14/skeptical-about-electrical/)
to suggest that it will be a while before electric aircraft are
practical — if it happens at all.  I don't think it will probably ever
be a very practical means of propulsion for aircraft, where weight is
so critically important.

Among ultralight aficionados, however, "practical" is not much of a
consideration.  Ultralights, which limited as they are to 254 pounds
empty weight, five gallons of gasoline, a stall speed of 28mph, and a
maximum level airspeed of 63mph, are most eminently impractical.  Many
ultralight pilots are excited about the idea of electric propulsion,
partly because most of the available powerplants that are light enough
are two-stroke engines, which are relatively unreliable, especially if
they are not meticulously maintained and carefully operated.  A
reliable electric powerplant would eliminate a major cause of
ultralight accidents.  Two-stroke engines also put out a lot of
incomplete combustion products, which bothers some
environmentally-minded ultralight pilots.  (Whether ultralights, or
recreational aviation as a whole, contributes significantly to overall
pollution is another question, and a doubtful one at that.)

The will is there to innovate on electric powerplants for ultralights,
and it would probably be a safety advantage if it were carried out,
but the FAA stands in the way.  The 254-pound empty weight requirement
is without fuel — but the FAA refuses to allow a similar exemption for
the weight of batteries, even an excess weight equal to the weight of
five gallons of gasoline, 30 pounds.  This is a serious handicap when
the weight restriction for ultralights is so severe.  FAR Part 103
includes weight allowances for ballistic recovery systems and floats,
but notwithstanding the safety advantages of a reliable electric
motor, no similar allowance is made for battery weight.

It seems that the FAA doesn't want to _think_ about ultralights,
anyway, and ultralight pilots are inclined to keep their heads down;
they remember what happened to the exemption for instruction in
two-seat ultralights.  Given that circumstance, I don't think this is
likely to change.
