title: The Old-Line Primitive Baptist Hymn and Tune Book
date: June 20, 2016
publish: no
<!-- Post Markdown begins here -->

I have spent the last couple of years working on a hymnal suitable for
Primitive Baptists and those that believe similarly, and it's just
recently left the printers.  A few people have asked a little more
information about what the plan of the book is, and how we went about
putting it together, so I'm writing this out as a place to direct
them.

## Rationale

The initial idea came from the observation that the doctrinal content
of the old words-only Primitive Baptist hymn books — especially
D.H. Goble's book, but others, as well — was more correct than the
newer books with musical notationj, without which many churches found
themselves at a loss for what tune to use.  I was not able to find a
book that included both musical notation and a wide variety of
Biblical hymns, and I suggested that such a thing was needed; as
always, the person who suggests a thing becomes the prime candidate to
make it.

The points I focused on were the following (in, approximately, order
of importance):

 - Doctrinal correctness, to sing what is true
 - Variety of topic, to supply every need
 - A limited number of tunes, so a church can know them all
 - Familiarity of texts and tunes
 
I wanted to have as many good hymns as could be put in a convenient
book, fitted to as few tunes as I could , and those as familiar as
possible.  Those goals dictated the format of the book, where most
pages or pairs of pages have a tune at the top and texts that can be
sung to it arranged in columns below; for hymns that have a specific
tune that is not shared by others, I adopted the now-traditional
layout, with the stanzas of the hymn arranged between the staves of
the tune.  Occasionally, familiarity of tunes trumped my desire to use
as few as possible; certain hymns are so closely associated with their
common tunes that to change them would be discomfiting.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

I think the Goble book would be a good starting point as a core group
of texts. We'd have to go through it carefully to omit or rectify any
error we could find. I've already been assembling a database of all
the combinations of texts and tunes in the Primitive Baptist hymnals I
own. I still haven't finished entering all the data yet, though; I'm
only about 2/3 the way through Durand/Lester,and I haven't even
started with Our Favorite Hymnal. Even so, I've used it to assemble a
list of about 200 texts that are common to two or more other hymnals
but do not appear in Goble, some of which we'd probably want to
include.

As far as tunes go, I think it would be best to limit their number,
and stick as far as is possible to the most common, to make it as easy
as possible for people to sing every text. I've used my database to
identify common tunes for about 250 of the 321 texts in Goble, and to
put together a list of the most frequently-occurring tunes in existing
hymnals. I'm not convinced that all of those are necessarily the most
common combinations in real use, however. Are you aware of anyone who
has kept records of what tunes are being used with texts from the
words-only books? I've gotten a copy of a partial list that
R. L. Vaughn has assembled of what tunes are used in East Texas
churches that use Lloyd's; if we could find some other people who have
kept similar records, that might give us some leads as to current
practice.

My idea of the end result is a hymnal slightly larger than the Daily
book, divided into sections like Goble, Beebe, or Lloyd, mostly with
one tune across the top of each two-page spread, and the rest of the
space below filled with texts. Probably at the end of each section
would be a few one-to-one tune/text combinations where either the text
and tune are so tied together that they wouldn't be appropriate used
separately or where the structure of the text requires a tune peculiar
to it.

It sounds like a vast undertaking, and I'm not sure that I have the
ability to do it right. However, I don't see anyone else doing it; the
few efforts I've seen toward a new Primitive Baptist hymnal have
followed the lead of the Old School Hymnal, abandoning many of the
older texts that contain true doctrine in favor of those that found
their initial popularity with other orders and contain nothing that
would offend their errors. They also seem to be abandoning the old
tunes in favor of ones whose character is less in line with heartfelt,
edifying singing, and less distinctively Primitive Baptist.  If it's
God's work, and we engage in it prayerfully, it wouldn't be in vain.

I hope I'm not suggesting this out of hubris or some desire to look
like I'm doing a big thing. I worry that instead of providing a good
alternative, we'd be increasing confusion and being divisive, which I
would certainly not want. I also hope I'm not proposing a new thing,
but rather a way of return to the old and good. I need your extremely
honest thoughts; I'm new to the church, and I don't want to take on
something I ought not, either because of my weakness or because of ill
effects I'm not wise enough to perceive.
